Received: Added at production
Revised: Added at production
Accepted: Added at production
DOI: xxx/xxxx
R E S E A R C H
A R T I C L E
RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware
Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource
Allocation Scheduling Management
Nadia QOUDHADH*1
Mostapha ZBAKH2
Yassir SAMADI3
Claude TADONKI4
1National School of Computer Science and Systems
Analysis, Mohamed V University in Rabat, Rabat,
Morocco,
Email: nadia_qoudhadh@um5.ac.ma
2National School of Computer Science and Systems
Analysis, Mohamed V University in Rabat, Rabat,
Morocco,
Email: mostapha.zbakh@ensias.um5.ac.ma
3Faculty of Science of Tetouan, Abdelmalek
Essaadi University, Tetouan, Morocco ,
Email: y.samadi@uae.ac.ma
4Centre de Recherche en Informatique (CRI), Mines
ParisTech–PSL, Paris, France ,
Email: claude.tadonki@mines-paristech.fr
Correspondence
Corresponding author: Nadia QOUDHADH,
Email: nadia_qoudhadh@um5.ac.ma
Abstract
Cloud computing is now the backbone of the advanced information technology infrastructure, where
appropriate resource scheduling is necessary to achieve efficiency in performance and cost. Although many
resource scheduling algorithms have been designed, few of them have been tested in real-world network
conditions, especially in Software-Defined Networks (SDN), where the interplay between routing decisions
and resource allocation remains poorly understood.
To address this gap, this paper proposes a new routing strategy that dynamically computes the most
suitable network path by jointly considering bandwidth availability and end-to-end latency. Called BLA
(Bandwidth-Latency-Aware). This contribution is embedded within a broader extension of SDNCloudSim,
a Software-Defined Networks simulation framework, which we enhance with a comprehensive Resource
Allocation Scheduling (RAS) Management module. The proposed RAS-SDNCloudSim framework includes
complementary advancements that work in synergy with BLA: (i) dynamic VM allocation policies (including
MFF - Most Full First, LWFF Least Weast Fast First, and LFF Least Full First), enabling customizable
resource management and load balancing across hosts; (ii) multiple workload scheduling policies (User
defined priority, Shortest Job First SJF, and Particle Swarm Optimization PSO), allowing meaningful
comparison of workload-level strategies; — The simulation results show that the proposed BLA strategy
reduces the average packet delay by 12.85%, while the reduction exceeds 20% during peak times. The
above-mentioned results place the proposed simulation framework in the position of being able to simulate
and evaluate advanced simulation algorithms in realistic cloud-SDN systems.
K E Y W O R D S
Cloud Computing, Algorithm Scheduling, Bandwidth and Latency Management, CloudSimSDN, Network
Optimization.
1
INTRODUCTION
The IT industry has been significantly transformed by the emergence of cloud computing. Indeed, it offers elastic, scalable,
and efficient service utility, thereby significantly reducing costs associated with hardware infrastructure and human resources.
As a result, organizations can now dynamically allocate resources based on demand without facing over-provisioning or
under-utilization. The deployment of services in cloud computing is broadly impacted by the elasticity, cost-effectiveness, and
scalability of resources1.
Resource Allocation and Scheduling (RAS) is a fundamental research area in cloud computing, where decisions have direct
effects on system performance and cost2. RAS plays critical role in ensuring efficient resource utilization, reducing energy
consumption, and maximizing profits for cloud service providers. Tinghuai Ma et al.2 have classified the RAS problem into five
primary focus areas, as illustrated in Figure 1 :
Abbreviations: BLA, Bandwidth-Latency Aware; SDN, Software-Defined Network; RAS, Resource Allocation Scheduling.
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 2026;00:1–16
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/
© 2026 Copyright Holder Name
1

2
QOUDHADH ET AL.
RAS algorithms 
and policies
   
Performance
based RAS
Workflow  Scheduling
Software as a Service  Layer RAS
Energy-aware RAS
Reliability-aware  Scheduling
Locality-aware  Task Scheduling
Performance &
Cost-based RAS
Cost-based
RAS
F I G U R E 1
A taxonomy of RAS algorithms and policies 2
Figure 1 above illustrates the five focus areas of RAS: (1) locality-aware task scheduling; (2) reliability-aware scheduling;
(3) energy-aware RAS; (4) SaaS layer RAS; and (5) workflow scheduling. These focus areas are classified into three main
categories: performance-based RAS, cost-based RAS and combined performance and cost-based RAS2.
Testing different scenarios on live physical systems to maximize performance while minimizing cost is often too expensive,
complex, time-consuming, and resource-intensive. To handle these challenges, simulation tools provide viable and cost-effective
alternatives that help researchers to develop, refine, and test their approaches in controlled and repeatable conditions. Furthermore,
such tools facilitate in-depth analysis of performance metrics about proposed solutions before their real-world deployment. A
variety of simulation tools are used today in academic and practical research for modeling various aspects of cloud infrastructure
and energy efficiency. Among such notable and widely adopted frameworks, CloudSim3 stands out. Over the years, several
extensions and frameworks have been developed on top of CloudSim. Each targeting specific areas such as WF-CloudSim
for workflow scheduling, basic SDNCloudSim including network aspects, container management and among many others.
However, SDNCloudSim still lacks an integrated version that combines key modules for bandwidth and latency optimization,
VM allocation policies, workflow scheduling, and result analysis. In light of these limitations, the contribution of this work is to
introduce an integrated SDNCloudSim combining bandwidth-latency-aware routing and advanced RAS management.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II highlights the background and related works, outlining the
existing solutions and their limitations. Section III describes our extended framework, RAS-SDNCloudSim, structured into two
subsections
–
: the new bandwidth-latency-aware policy, VM allocation strategies, and workflow scheduling policies. Section IV reveals
the findings by presenting an analysis of the proposed improvements in the paper, while Section V concludes the paper with
possible future directions of related research studies.
–
2
BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH CHALLENGES
This section introduces the CloudSim Toolkit framework and the extensions developed in previous simulation studies for the
cloud computing environment, covering areas such as resource management, networks, containers, data placement and security.
2.1
CloudSim Toolkit
CloudSim is recognized as the most prominent, advanced, and widely used simulation framework3, which is characterized by
the following properties:
Flexibility and Extensibility: is developed in a way that it can simulate various cloud infrastructure models, including
data-centers, virtual machines, hosts, and resource allocation policies, which can facilitate various cloud-related research studies4.
Scalability: supports different-scale simulations, ranging from smaller to larger topologies. This scalability enables realistic
simulation of cloud system performance under varying loads. Giving information on resource allocation and load balancing5.

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
3
Customization and Extensibility: due to its open-source model, it allows for the implementation and development of custom
algorithms. Or the integration with supporting tools. This helps in simulating a specific algorithm related to scheduling, networks,
or resource management6.
Realistic Cloud Resource Simulation: supports real cloud resource simulation. From the physical level to the virtual one. This
is a very important facet of cloud simulations, especially when it comes to cloud resource allocation and cloud energy efficiency,
as indicated in a paper by Salem et al.7.
CloudSim is a discrete-event simulation framework that consists of three layers as illustrated in Figure 28, each serving a
specific purpose:
1. Core Simulation Engine: This level is responsible for cloud simulation events and entities, such as entity creation, scheduling,
and processing. Entities here include hosts, virtual machines, brokers, and associated components.
2. CloudSim Layer: This layer captures the behavior of the cloud infrastructure. The network topology specifies the connections
between cloud-related resources, such as virtual machines, brokers, and data centers, as well as resource allocation processes
based on policies, scalability, and elasticity.
3. User code: In this tier users can customize the experimental setups. The user broker applies customized policies regarding
resource management and task scheduling.
CloudSim has a modular and extensible architecture based on the separation of concerns principle. Users define the require-
ments, while CloudSim handles the simulation mechanism. This design promotes flexibility, reusability, and the ability to deal
with multiple models of cloud computing by distinguishing the different levels of CloudSim architecture, as shown in Figure 2,
proposed by Calheiros R et al.8.
User Code 
CloudSim
Core Simulation Engine
Simulation
Specification 
Scheduling
Policy 
User
Interface
Structure 
VM
Services 
Cloud
Services
Cloud
Ressources
Network 
General
configuration 
Scenario
Definition
User
Requirements
Input of
Workload Data
Logging and Output
Preferences
Interaction with
CloudSim API
Dynamic Adjustment
of Policies:
Definition of
Scheduling Policies
Customization of
Entities
User Broker
Configuration
Network Behavior
Analysis 
Network Topology 
Message Delay
Calculation 
Interaction with
Entities 
Data Center 
Event handling 
Sensor
Cloud coordinator
VM Provisioning 
CPU Allocation 
Memory Allocation 
Storage Allocation 
Bandwidth Allocation 
VM Management 
Cloudlet Execution 
Cloudlet
Virtual Machine 
CloudSim Layers 
F I G U R E 2
CloudSim architecture layers 8
2.2
Related Works
A variety of extensions have been developed for CloudSim to overcome various challenges. In the section below, we describe the
contributions and shortcomings of related works, thereby opening the avenue for the present study.
CloudSimSDN, presented by authors Jungmin et al.9 is an extension of the base CloudSim framework with the integration
of Software Defined Networking (SDN) concept. It enables both physical and virtual network simulations controlled by SDN
controllers and analyzes how networks impact system performance. However, despite the above-mentioned strengths, it lacks
fine-grained and dynamic control abilities concerning complex workloads as well as advanced scheduling strategies.

4
QOUDHADH ET AL.
WorkflowSim, developed by W. Chen et al.10 focuses more on simulating scientific workflow applications in a distributed
setup. This model takes into consideration the dependencies between tasks to increase the realism of simulated applications.
Unfortunately, the model does not have the capability to simulate the network infrastructure, thereby making it impossible to
derive information related to latency and bandwidth utilized by the workflow application. This becomes one of the key factors in
our proposed method.
CloudSim Plus, as enhanced by M. C. Silva et al.11, improves the modularity and scalability characteristics in CloudSim. By
providing an extensible and well-structured simulation toolkit. While it integrates new policies and models, it remains focused on
compute and resource management. Which reduces its suitability for scenarios where network behavior significantly influences
system performance.
IoTSim12 is an extension of CloudSim for Internet of Things (IoT) applications. It models the interaction between IoT devices
and cloud infrastructure. IoTSim is useful for simulating latency and edge cloud resource allocation. However, it does not capture
the network layer and lacks the programmability and path control features that SDN-based frameworks offer.
ContainerCloudSim, in its advanced form developed by N. Saleh et al.13 simulates containerized environments. The authors
identify three main areas of existing shortcomings in the ContainerCloudSim model. Firstly, they introduce a feature allowing
data centers to host both containers and virtual machines (VMs). Secondly, they develop a dynamic simulation approach. Cloud
tasks (cloudlets) are dynamically scheduled, instead of all being submitted at the beginning. This approach mimics real-world
scenarios where tasks unpredictably arrive. Thirdly, they have incorporated interdependent task simulation using the concept of
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), hence making their simulation of containers even more realistic. However, it is worth noting
that the simulation still assumes a static opaque network. That limits the evaluation of policies that depend on real-time network
metrics. A gap our work aims to address.
DFMCloudSim14 is used to extend the features of the CloudSim simulator to support the concepts of data fragmentation
and migration15 in cloud-based applications. DFMCloudSim fragments a large amount of data and migrates only the required
fragments, reducing transfer overhead. The tool simulates geographically distributed data centers, enabling users to test strategies
before real-world deployment, with support for formats such as plain text files.
Moreover, recent research focuses on authentication and key agreement between controllers and edge nodes16. These efforts
extended SDN cloud environments by developing secure and lightweight communication frameworks. While these works
bring enhanced trust and privacy in emerging cloud-edge networks, none of them tackle dynamic bandwidth and latency-aware
scheduling, which is the core focus of the present study.
Then, Anand et al.17 offer a comprehensive overview of SDN security mechanisms against DoS and DDoS attacks, which
include FloodDefender, SDN-Guard, and the entropy-based detection strategy. Their results show how to integrate security.
Performance optimization is an open challenge in SDN environments, an aspect that RAS-SDNCloudSim tries to address by
integration of bandwidth and latency-aware policy. These tools illustrate the advancement of CloudSim-based simulations. Each
extension addresses specific challenges such as workflow modeling, IoT integration, data migration, security, and container
orchestration. Yet, they present common limitations: a lack of detailed network awareness. The basic parameters, such as
bandwidth, latency, or dynamic link selection policies, remain unaddressed. The design of RAS-SDNCloudSim aims to extend
the functionalities of CloudSimSDN in a consistent manner, requiring fast communication between microservices. This involves
overcoming the current limitations in cloud simulation tools to incorporate a scheduling mechanism that considers bandwidth
and latency.
2.3
Research Challenges
The design of RAS-SDNCloudsim is motivated by the following key challenges :
1. (i) Network-Aware Resource Scheduling : How can resource allocation and workload scheduling decisions simultaneously
account for network-level constraints namely available bandwidth and end-to-end latency in an SDN-controlled cloud
infrastructure?
2. (ii) Dynamic and Multi-Criteria Path Selection: How to dynamically select the optimal network path in a multi-hop SDN
topology by jointly optimizing bandwidth availability, latency, and energy consumption, rather than relying on static or
arbitrary default routing? The trade-off between maximizing throughput, minimizing end-to-end delay, and reducing energy
consumption constitutes a multi-objective optimization problem that varies with real-time traffic conditions. Selecting a
path with higher available bandwidth may reduce queuing delays but could increase energy consumption by activating

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
5
additional switches or links. Conversely, consolidating traffic onto fewer links saves energy but risks creating congestion
and violating SLAs.
To address these challenges, we propose RAS-SDNCloudSim with a Bandwidth-Latency-Aware (BLA) routing policy,
modular VM allocation and scheduling components.
2.4
Our contribution
In this paper, we propose a new Bandwidth-Latency-Aware policy for selecting links. Unlike the default CloudSim SDN routing
mechanism, which chooses network paths in a static or arbitrary manner without considering network performance parameters,
the proposed BLA policy will evaluate all possible paths between a given source and destination based on the bandwidth and
latency of those paths. The path that provides the best trade-off between available bandwidth and end-to-end latency is selected
as the routing path to transmit the workload. As illustrated below in Figure 3, workloads are submitted through the cloud broker,
scheduled by algorithm scheduling, then routed via BLA through the hierarchical network (core →aggregate →edge switches)
to reach VMs hosted on edge servers.
F I G U R E 3
Cloud Scheduling environment 18
3
SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM DEFINITION
This section defines the architectural and mathematical environment of the proposed RAS-SDNCloudSim framework, establishing
the formal basis for the Bandwidth-Latency-Aware (BLA) routing strategy.
3.1
System Model
Cloud computing environments rely on efficient network performance to support data-intensive workloads such as video
streaming, big data analytics, microservices, and HPC. Bandwidth and latency are critical factors directly affecting data transfer
rates and end-to-end QoS19,1.
Bandwidth refers to the maximum data rate supported by a communication link (bits/s), while throughput denotes the
effective rate achieved in practice, which is typically lower due to congestion, protocol overhead, and inefficiencies19,20,21.
End-to-end latency is decomposed into four fundamental components. For any path p consisting of k hops:
Le2e(p) =
k
X
i=1
 Dproc,i + Dprop,i + Dtrans,i + Dqueue,i

,
(1)
where each component is defined as follows.

6
QOUDHADH ET AL.
Processing delay (Dproc): the time required by a network device (sender, switch, or receiver) to process a packet before
forwarding, including header parsing and routing table lookup.
Propagation delay (Dprop): the time for a signal to traverse the physical medium19:
Dprop = d × n
c
,
(2)
where d is the physical distance, c = 3.0 × 108 m/s is the speed of light in vacuum, and n is the refractive index of the medium
(e.g., n ≈1.5 for optical fiber).
Transmission delay (Dtrans): the time to push a packet onto the link19:
Dtrans = S
ηB,
(3)
where η ∈(0, 1] represents effective bandwidth efficiency under contention and protocol overhead.
Queuing delay (Dqueue): the time packets spend waiting in buffers at switches due to congestion. Modeling each link as an
M/M/1 queue22:
Dqueue =
ρ
µ(1 – ρ),
(4)
where ρ = λ/µ is the link utilization and λ is the packet arrival rate.
The cumulative effect of these delay components is illustrated in Figure 4, which highlights the role of switch processing
delay as a key performance factor18,23.
F I G U R E 4
Overview of network delays in SDN environments 18.
The physical infrastructure is modeled as a hierarchical directed graph:
G = (N, L),
(5)
where N = H ∪S is the set of nodes comprising physical hosts H = {h1, . . . , hn} and SDN switches S = {s1, . . . , sm} organized
into three layers — Core (C), Aggregate (A), and Edge (E) — and L = {l1, . . . , lk} is the set of communication links.
Each link l ∈L is characterized by the tuple (Bl, dl, nl, Sl), where Bl is the total bandwidth capacity, dl is the physical distance
between endpoints, nl is the refractive index of the medium, and Sl is the average packet size .
To ensure a realistic simulation of dynamic network behavior, the model incorporates:
•
Network state sensing: The system tracks real-time link utilization ρl = usedBWl
Bl
, where usedBWl is the currently allocated
bandwidth. To prevent numerical instabilities under saturation, ρl is capped at 0.99.
•
Congestion modeling: To avoid numerical instabilities during peak traffic, the link utilization is capped at ρ = 0.99.
•
Service rate formulation: Each network link is modeled as an M/M/1 queue, where the service rate µ is defined as µ = B
S ,
with B being the link bandwidth (bits/s) and S the average packet size (bits)22.
3.2
Problem Formulation
The research addresses the lack of synergy between computational scheduling and network-aware orchestration. Standard
approaches employ a Select-First-Link (SFL) policy, which selects the first available path p1 ∈P regardless of network
congestion.

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
7
The challenge is formalized as: find an optimal path P∗that satisfies bandwidth requirements while minimizing end-to-end
latency Le2e.
The latency for any path p ∈P is the sum of four delay components :
Le2e(p) =
k
X
i=1
(Dproc,i + Dprop,i + Dtrans,i + Dqueue,i)
(6)
3.3
Objective Function
The BLA policy aims to minimize end-to-end latency while satisfying bandwidth constraints:
P∗= arg min
p∈P Le2e(p)
s.t.
min
l∈p Bavail
l
≥Breq
(7)
where Le2e(p) is the total latency of path p (sum of processing, propagation, transmission, and queuing delays), and Breq is the
workload’s bandwidth requirement.
3.4
The BLA Proposed Strategy
The Bandwidth-Latency-Aware (BLA) strategy represents a paradigm shift from static to dynamic orchestration. Unlike the SFL
policy, BLA performs a multi-criteria optimization as described in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1 Bandwidth-Latency-Aware (BLA)-Path Selection Procedure
Input:
f: workload flow, S: packet size, h_s, h_d: source and destination hosts
Output: P*: optimal network path
P <- Identify set of all possible network paths between h_s and h_d
for each path p_j in P do
B_path(p_j) <- min(availableBandwidth) of all links l in p_j
if B_path(p_j) >= S_req then
D_proc <- Retrieve CPU processing delay for nodes in p_j
D_queue <- rho / (mu * (1 - rho))
L_e2e(p_j) <- D_proc + D_trans + D_queue
end if
end for
P* <- Select p_j that minimizes L_e2e(p_j) while maximizing B_path(p_j)
Route workload flow f through selected optimal path P*
return P*
3.5
System Workflow
Given a workload, the BLA policy is executed as follows:
•
All possible network paths between the source and destination are identified.

8
QOUDHADH ET AL.
•
The minimum available bandwidth along all the identified paths is calculated.
•
The end-to-end latency of all identified paths is estimated by summing up processing delay, propagation delay, transmission
delay, and queuing delay.
•
A composite cost is calculated by combining bandwidth availability and latency.
•
The path with optimal trade-off between low latency and high available bandwidth is identified for packet transmission.
The mechanism of workload processing is systematically represented in the sequence diagram below and comprehensively
described thereafter.
scheduleWorkloadCompletion()
:Main
:Datacenter
:Broker
:NOS
Main() to run
submitDeployApplicationn(datacenter,
deploymentFile)
processApplication()
addVm(), addFlow();
startDeployApplication()
:WorkloadParser
parseNextWorkloads()
processWorkloadSubmit()
:SDNHost
calculateProcessingDelay
()
findBestPath(): ( Max bandwidth
and Min Latency)
Processing Delay
:LogManager
Log metrics 
APPLICATION_SUBMIT 
APPLICATION_SUBMIT_ACK
WORKLOAD_SUBMIT 
applicationSubmitCompleted()
submitRequests()
scheduleWorkload()
WORKLOAD_COMPLETED 
Loop
Loop
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Event SDNCLOUDSIM
Component
Create Datacenter; loadPhysicalTopology,
 VMAllocation policies
addHosts()
setLinkSelectionPolicy(policy) : Bandwidth-Latency Aware
Create Broker()
F I G U R E 5
Workflow of application deployment and workload execution
Figure 5 illustrates the complete workflow of application deployment. The process begins in the initialization phase, triggered
by the main() method. Step 1 configures the simulation environment. The broker is instantiated, and the physical topology
is loaded. Then allocation and link-selection policies are established. This configuration ensures that subsequent resource
provisioning and routing decisions are aligned with the chosen optimization strategies.
Still in Step 1, the submitDeployApplicationn() method is called to provide the broker with the deployment file. It defines
the virtual topology. The broker then sends an APPLICATION_SUBMIT event to the datacenter in Step 2 to trigger the
processApplication() method. In this step, virtual machines (VMs) and network flows are parsed and added to the Network
Operating System (NOS), enabling application deployment.
After the deployment process. In Step 3, the datacenter sends back an APPLICATION_SUBMIT_ACK event. Containing
critical mappings such as VM name-to-ID, flow ID assignments, and bandwidth configurations. Upon receiving this acknowledg-
ment, the broker invokes applicationSubmitCompleted(). Which initializes workload parsers and begins reading the workload
files using the parseNextWorkloads() method in Step 4.
The parsed workloads are submitted to the datacenter through WORKLOAD_SUBMIT event. In Step 5, the datacenter
processes the request. By identifying VMs and hosts source and destination. Calculating CPU processing delay (calculatePro-
cessingDelay()). Then, the optimal network path is selected by using the preconfigured link selection policy (findBestPath()).

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
9
In Step 6, all delays (processing, propagation, transmission) are calculated. The WORKLOAD_COMPLETED event is then
scheduled and passed back to the broker.
Next, the broker obtains key performance metrics such as processing time, propagation, transmission, queuing delays, and
total latency. All these details are encapsulated through a RequestMetrics object, which is stored along with the LogManager
in Step 7. The design provides a clean separation of concerns. Between parsing, deployment, execution, and logging. Besides
supporting dynamic scheduling and fine-grained performance monitoring.
3.6
RAS-SDNCloudSim Architecture
The proposed RAS-SDNCloudSim focuses on the dynamic routing stategy, multi-objective resource allocation and monitoring
process. This work combines the aforementioned issues into four key components:
•
Bandwidth and Latency Aware (BLA) Rooting Strategy.
•
Advanced VM Allocation Policies: Various heuristic algorithms such as Least Waste Fast First (LWFF), Most Full First
(MFF), Least Full First (LFF), and First-Come-First-Served (FCFS) are implemented in the RASSDNCloudSim. The module
is upgraded with different algorithms, increasing its ability to handle resource management in different cloud workloads.
•
Workflow Scheduling: The workload allocation package is improved by adding various workflow scheduling techniques,
such as User Defined Priority (Priority), Shortest Job First (SJF) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO).
•
Logs and Monitoring: Include LogManager and LogMonitor modules. It tracks metrics for CPU, RAM, bandwidth, delays,
energy consumption, and SLA violations during the simulation.
The package diagram in Figure 6 shows how the RAS-SDNCloudSim architecture. It is organized into modules. This diagram
highlights the updated and newly added packages in SDNCloudSim. The project is organized as several packages. Where each
F I G U R E 6
RAS-SDNCloudSim Extension package diagram
one encapsulates specific functionalities. The SDNCloudsim structure is extended by updating or adding new classes. The
following overview below shows these packages with an emphasis on newly added classes and their roles:
VmAllocation: This package includes a distinct set of VM placement strategies tailored for different objectives. It is updated
with different traditional and custom heuristic policies.
WFallocation: This package contains workload-level scheduling policies.

10
QOUDHADH ET AL.
SelectLink: This module provides routing policies for link selection in SDN environments. It includes both basic and advanced
strategies.
Parsers: Custom parsers aid in accurate and flexible data parsing. These are used for advanced topology and workload
specifications.
Workload: This package models execution behavior of distributed services and dynamic applications. By using a fine-grained
structure: workload, activity, request, processing, and transmission. All these components cover computation and communication
workloads in microservices.
Monitor and Logs: The LogMonitor extends the base class SimEntity in order to monitor events occurring on fixed time
interval in the simulation environment. It gathers statistics related to hosts, virtual machines (CPU, RAM) as well as network
links (Bandwidth, Latency and Delay) from the simulation environment.
The collected data is buffered and processed in the form of CSV logs through the LogManager tool. It provides a format for
writing all the collected measurement results to fixed output files, including real-time and global information like VM allocations,
workflow scheduling policies, among others. When all workloads are completed, the monitoring process stops automatically.
This is managed through the STOP_MONITORING event. By using the STOP_MONITORING event which triggers a graceful
shutdown of the data collection mechanism.
Link class: is improved to automatic calculation of the propagation delay depending on the distance and the refractive index,
allowing the simulation procedure for network behaviors, including congestions, in the SDN cloud environment.
Packet: extended to track propagation delay and failure handling. Moreover, it accesses the source host through the Network
Operating System (NOS) class. Fine-grained tracing of network delays and packet failure is enabled.
SDNDatacenter: updated to support dynamic workload submission, link-aware scheduling, and accurate latency tracking
(processing, propagation and transmission).
NetworkOperatingSystem: orchestrates VM deployment, flow configuration, and dynamic channel management in an SDN-
based cloud simulation. Enhanced with bandwidth-latency-aware routing, topology construction, and dynamic monitoring of
host, VM, and link utilization. Support for logging and monitoring is enabled via LogManager and LogMonitor, with real-time
control of simulation events.
Python Analyser: this package contains metricAnalyser script. It loads CSV metrics log files such as energy consumption,
delay, and resource utilization. It then generates comparative graphs. The result provides clear visual insights into energy usage,
packet delays, and host metrics.
3.7
Workflow Scheduling Policies
In cloud computing, workflow scheduling can be categorized into simple and scientific workflows. Simple workflows consist
of sequences of tasks with minimal dependencies. While scientific workflows (Montage, LIGO, CyberShake, SIPHT, and
Epigenomics) involve complex, data-intensive computations in fields like astronomy, seismology, and bioinformatics. These
scientific workflows demand high processing power and benefit from cloud computing on-demand resource provisioning.
Generally, workflow scheduling can be classified into user-level (handling service provisioning for users) and system level
(managing cloud data center resources). Furthermore, scheduling methods can be static (fixed task-resource mapping) or dynamic
(adapting to task arrivals in real-time). Other classifications include centralized vs. distributed, preemptive vs. non-preemptive,
and online vs. offline scheduling24. Scientific workflows are often modeled as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). It consist of
interdependent tasks executed in a specific order. In a DAG, nodes represent tasks, and directed edges represent dependencies
between tasks. To avoid circular dependencies and enable efficient scheduling tasks are executed in a specific order25. The
core objective of workflow scheduling is to assign these interdependent tasks to available computational resources (e.g., virtual
machines, CPUs, GPUs). Then, optimize key metrics such as makespan (total execution time), cost, energy consumption,
reliability, load balancing, service-level agreement compliance, and security awareness. Cloud environments are inherently
dynamic, and the diversity of cloud resources makes the scheduling process even more complex26.
Regarding the scheduling of tasks in cloud infrastructure, there are predominantly two methods: heuristic techniques and
metaheuristic techniques. The first one uses static criteria to allocate tasks to resources. These techniques include approaches
such as Heterogeneous Earliest Finish Time (HEFT), Min-Min, Max-Min, and Round Robin. Metaheuristic techniques, on the
other hand, use an advanced search process involving the fusion of various techniques based on evolutionary algorithm27. Like:
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), which is an ant-based process that applies the search strategies used by ants when foraging
for food in search of task scheduling path optimizations; Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), which allocates tasks to virtual

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
11
machines in an optimized process involving task positioning in the swarm search process; Genetic Algorithms (GA), which
applies the concepts of selection and mutation in task/resource allocations; and Simulated Annealing (SA), which applies the
concepts of annealing in the reduction of costs and time consumption24.
Apart from the virtual machine allocation mechanisms, the RAS-SDNCloudSim module also supports a number of workflow
scheduling mechanisms. The SJFWorkloadScheduler was chosen due to its simplicity in reducing the average task completion
time. This algorithm favors short workflows, makespan, and resource utilization, especially in a scenario dominated by a number
of small jobs. When it is compared to FCFS or Round Robin, the SJF offers better performance with low overhead, making it a
practical and lightweight scheduling choice for simulation contexts28.
We have also implemented the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm27. Which is a metaheuristic search algorithm
that uses a population of candidate solutions, referred to as particles, whose behavior is based on social colony movement. The
search for the solution is performed using the iterative process of updating candidate solutions based on individual experience
and social intelligence, thereby effectively identifying near-optimal solutions for the complex nature of cloud infrastructure.
Additionally, we introduced User Defined Priority scheduling, allowing workflow submitters to assign priority levels to their
workloads. High-priority workflows preempt lower-priority ones, ensuring critical business applications meet SLA requirements
while maintaining fairness through priority aging mechanisms to prevent starvation.
Combining these workflow scheduling policies with VM allocation strategies offers a holistic approach to optimize the use of
resources in the RAS-SDNCloudSim. The choice of the appropriate policy should correlate with the application requirements.
Therefore, the approach can provide optimal usage of resources, fast execution times of workflows.
4
EXPERIMENT AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we evaluate the benefits of the proposed extensions under realistic conditions based on several key performance
metrics.
4.1
Experimental Set-up and Architecture
5
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Our paper introduces RAS-SDNCLOUDSIM, an extension of the CloudSimSDN platform that bridges a critical gap between
computational scheduling and network-aware orchestration in cloud simulation. By integrating a Bandwidth-Latency-Aware
(BLA) link selection policy, our framework enables fine-grained evaluation of resource allocation and routing strategies in
microservice-based cloud environments. This work addresses the essential need for joint optimization of computational and
network resources — an aspect often overlooked in existing CloudSim-based frameworks. We developed a modular experimental
framework that incorporates detailed performance metrics, including delay components (processing, transmission, propagation,
queuing), energy consumption, and comprehensive resource utilization (CPU, RAM, bandwidth), to thoroughly assess the
effectiveness of the proposed BLA policy alongside complementary workload scheduling mechanisms.
Through simulation experiments using both physical and virtual topologies, we demonstrated that the proposed BLA policy
substantially reduces end-to-end packet delays compared to the default Select-First-Link (SFL) approach, while maintaining
stable energy consumption. This BLA module constitutes the core scientific contribution of this study, as it introduces a dynamic,
multi-criteria routing mechanism that jointly optimizes computational and network resources—an aspect. Unlike existing
approaches that rely on static link assumptions, the BLA mechanism adapts routing in real time based on bandwidth availability
and latency feedback, thereby selecting the least congested and most efficient paths.
Quantitatively, the BLA mechanism achieves an average packet-delay reduction of approximately 12.85% compared to
SFL, with peaks exceeding 20% for critical service communications . This consistent reduction directly translates into lower
overall network latency, confirming the strong impact of bandwidth–latency–aware routing on Quality of Service (QoS) and
responsiveness in SDN-enabled clouds.
In addition, we also implement, test and evaluate various workload scheduling strategies, including Shortest Job First (SJF),
Hybrid SJF (SJFH), and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). The results indicate that PSO achieves the best trade-off in
heterogeneous workloads, while simpler strategies such as SJF and SJFH provide greater stability with lower overhead in
homogeneous environments.

12
QOUDHADH ET AL.
These findings confirm an inherent trade-off between latency reduction and energy efficiency: while advanced mechanisms
(e.g., BLA and PSO) significantly improve QoS and reduce delay, they may incur slightly higher computational costs. This
emphasizes the need for adaptive, feedback-based policies capable of dynamically balancing performance objectives according
to system constraints.
This flexible architecture opens new research perspectives, such as the simulation of microservice deployments based on
containerized microservices for lightweight deployment scenarios (for example, based on Kubernetes). As well as the integration
of advanced VM allocation policies (e.g., BestFit, LWFF, Energy-Aware). Additionally, "intelligent GA algorithms to optimize
the scheduling process" can be leveraged.
Future work will extend
For the future, the work will compare the proposed RAS-SDNCloudSim simulator to existing state-of-the-art cloud and edge
cloud simulators like iFogSim, EdgeCloudSim, in order to measure its extensibility to the hybrid cloud edge scenario. Moreover,
the evaluation of larger and more complex topologies is necessary to further validate scalability and robustness. Various cloud
security solutions such as isolation, access control16 and threat detection17,29,30 will enable a more realistic and comprehensive
evaluation of cloud-native scheduling in dynamic, multi-tenant environments.

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
13
CAPTIONS AND ALT TEXT
Figure 1 Caption: A taxonomy of RAS algorithms and policies
Figure 1 Alt Text: Hierarchical diagram categorizing RAS algorithms into proactive and reactive policies with subtypes
including load-aware, threshold-based, and hybrid strategies.
Figure 2 Caption: CloudSim Layer
Figure 2 Alt Text: Layered architecture of CloudSim simulation framework showing components from user level to datacenter,
including VM, resource, and event management layers.
Figure 3 Caption: RAS-SDNCloudSim Extension package diagram
Figure 3 Alt Text: UML package diagram showing modules such as scheduling, SDN controller, and RAS integration in the
RAS-SDNCloudSim simulation extension.
Figure 4 Caption: Overview of network Delays
Figure 4 Alt Text: Illustration showing types of network delays including queuing, transmission, propagation, and processing,
across a virtual SD-WAN environment.
Figure 5 Caption: Workflow of application deployment and workload execution
Figure 5 Alt Text: Flowchart illustrating steps of application deployment, including service instantiation, VM placement, and
cloudlet execution.
Figure 6 Caption: Physical and Virtual Topology
Figure 6 Alt Text: Diagram showing the mapping between physical and virtual network components including hosts, VMs, and
SDN switches.
Figure 7 Caption: Energy consumption impacted by different Link Selection Policies
Figure 7 Alt Text: Bar chart comparing the maximum energy consumption (J) per host under different network link selection
policies.
Figure 8 Caption: Packet Delay
Figure 8 Alt Text: Line plot showing packet delay variations over time under different routing strategies.
Figure 9 Caption: Average CPU Utilization per Host
Figure 9 Alt Text: Bar chart showing average CPU utilization for each physical host in the datacenter during the simulation.
Figure 10 Caption: Energy consumption
Figure 10 Alt Text: Bar chart comparing energy usage across different link selections in scenario 1.
Figure 11 Caption: Average Packet Delay Comparison – SFL vs. BLA with WD Scheduling Strategies
Figure 11 Alt Text: Comparative bar chart showing average packet delay for two routing policies (SFL and BLA) under
Weighted Delay scheduling.
Figure 12 Caption: Average Packet Delay per Path - Comparison between SFL and BLA
Figure 12 Alt Text: Bar chart showing path-specific average delays under two routing strategies, highlighting the impact of link
selection.
Figure 13 Caption: Average CPU Utilization per Host – Comparison of Scheduling Policies
Figure 13 Alt Text: Bar chart comparing host CPU utilization across various workload scheduling policies such as SJF, PSO,
and Hybrid.
Figure 14 Caption: Impact of Scheduling and Link Selection Policies on Average Packet Delay
Figure 14 Alt Text: Combined chart comparing average packet delays across combinations of link selection and scheduling
policies.

14
QOUDHADH ET AL.
Figure 15 Caption: Average CPU Utilization per Host under BLA and SFL Link Policies (Default Scheduling)
Figure 15 Alt Text: Bar chart comparing CPU usage under two routing strategies with default scheduling across hosts.
Figure 16 Caption: Average CPU Utilization per Host under BLA and SFL Link Policies (PSO Scheduling)
Figure 16 Alt Text: CPU usage comparison across hosts under PSO scheduling with two routing strategies: BLA and SFL.
Figure 17 Caption: Average CPU Utilization per Host under BLA Routing with Different Scheduling Policies
Figure 17 Alt Text: Bar chart showing CPU utilization under BLA routing strategy with scheduling policies including default,
SJF, and PSO.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Nadia QOUDHADH: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft, Visualization.
Mostapha Zbakh: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Validation, Resources, Writing - review - editing.
Yassir Samadi: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Resources, Validation, Writing - review - editing.
Claude Tadonkey: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Resources, Validation, Writing - review - editing.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
No funding was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author, NQ, upon reasonable request.

RAS-SDNCloudSim : Integrating Bandwidth-Latency-Aware Routing into SDNCloudSim Framework for Advanced Resource Allocation Scheduling Management
15
REFERENCES
1. Armbrust M, Fox A, Griffith R, et al. A view of cloud computing. Commun ACM. 2010;53(4):50–58. doi: 10.1145/1721654.1721672
2. Ma T, Chu Y, Zhao L, Ankhbayar O. Resource allocation and scheduling in cloud computing: policy and algorithm. IETE Tech Rev. 2014;31(1):4–16.
doi: 10.1080/02564602.2014.890837
3. Barbierato E, Gribaudo M, Iacono M, Jakobik A. Exploiting CloudSim in a multiformalism modeling approach for cloud based systems. Simul
Model Pract Theory. 2019;93:133–147. doi: 10.1016/j.simpat.2018.09.018
4. Kecskemeti G. DISSECT-CF: a simulator to foster energy-aware scheduling in infrastructure clouds. Simul Model Pract Theory. 2015;58:188–200.
doi: 10.1016/j.simpat.2015.05.009
5. Thanapal P, Saleem M, Durai S. Energy saving offloading scheme for mobile cloud computing using CloudSim. Int J Adv Intell Paradigms.
2018;10(1–2):45–62. doi: 10.1504/IJAIP.2018.089488
6. Ranjan K, Sahoo G. Cloud computing simulation using CloudSim. arXiv preprint. 2014. arXiv:1403.6743.
7. Salem D, Haggag M, Mostafa M. Multi-core processors in cloud computing using CloudSim. Int J Comput Appl. 2016;137(8):31–34. doi:
10.5120/ijca2016908869
8. Calheiros R, Ranjan R, Beloglazov A, De Rose C, Buyya R. CloudSim: a toolkit for modeling and simulation of cloud computing environments
and evaluation of resource provisioning algorithms. Softw Pract Exp. 2011;41(1):23–50. doi: 10.1002/spe.995
9. Son J, Dastjerdi A, Calheiros R, Ji X, Yoon Y, Buyya R. CloudSimSDN: modeling and simulation of software-defined cloud data centers. In:
2015:475–484
10. Chen W, Deelman E. WorkflowSim: a toolkit for simulating scientific workflows in distributed environments. In: 2012:1–8
11. Silva Filho M, Oliveira R, Monteiro C, Inacio P, Freire M. CloudSim Plus: a cloud computing simulation framework pursuing software engineering
principles for improved modularity, extensibility and correctness. In: 2017:400–406
12. Zeng X, Garg S, Strazdins P, Jayaraman P, Georgakopoulos D, Ranjan R. IOTSim: a simulator for analysing IoT applications. J Syst Archit.
2017;72:93–107. doi: 10.1016/j.sysarc.2016.06.008
13. Saleh N, Mashaly M. A dynamic simulation environment for container-based cloud data centers using ContainerCloudSim. In: 2019:332–336
14. Bouhouch L, Zbakh M, Tadonki C. DFMCloudsim: an extension of cloudsim for modeling and simulation of data fragments migration over
distributed data centers. International Journal of Computers and Applications. 2024;46(1):1–20. doi: 10.1080/1206212X.2023.2277554
15. Bouhouch L, Zbakh M, Tadonki C. Data Migration: Cloudsim Extension. 2020:177–181. doi: 10.1145/3372454.3372472
16. Anand N, Saifulla M. EN-LAKP: lightweight authentication and key agreement protocol for emerging networks. IEEE Access. 2013;11:28645–
28657. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3255646
17. Anand N, Saifulla M, Ponnuru R, Alavalapati G, Patan R, Gandomi A. Securing software defined networks: a comprehensive analysis of approaches,
applications, and future strategies against DoS attacks. IEEE Access. 2025;13:64473–64515. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3520478
18. Alwasel K, Jha D, Hernandez E, et al. IOTSim-SDWAN: a simulation framework for interconnecting distributed datacenters over software-defined
wide area network (SD-WAN). J Parallel Distrib Comput. 2020;143:17–35. doi: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.04.006
19. Peterson L, Davie B. Computer networks: a systems approach. Morgan Kaufmann. 5th ed., 2012.
20. Prasad R, Dovrolis C, Murray M, Claffy K. Bandwidth estimation: metrics, measurement techniques, and tools. IEEE Netw. 2003;17(6):27–35.
doi: 10.1109/MNET.2003.1248658
21. Alsubai S, Garg H, Alqahtani A. A novel hybrid MSA-CSA algorithm for cloud computing task scheduling problems. Symmetry. 2023;15(10):1931.
doi: 10.3390/sym15101931
22. Ramaswamy R, Weng N, Wolf T. Characterizing network processing delay. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2004. GLOBECOM
’04.. 2004;3:1629-1634 Vol.3.
23. Abolfazli S, Sanaei Z, Alizadeh M, Gani A, Xia F. An experimental analysis on cloud-based mobile augmentation in mobile cloud computing.
IEEE Trans Consum Electron. 2014;60(1):146–154. doi: 10.1109/TCE.2014.6780937
24. Masdari M, ValiKardan S, Shahi Z, Azar S. Towards workflow scheduling in cloud computing: a comprehensive analysis. J Netw Comput Appl.
2016;66:64–82. doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2016.01.018
25. Uma K, Shukla S. Energy and performance-aware workflow scheduler using dynamic virtual network resource optimization under edge-cloud
platform. Comput Electr Eng. 2025;123:110085. doi: 10.1016/j.compeleceng.2025.110085
26. Yassir S, Mostapha Z, Claude T. Workflow scheduling issues and techniques in cloud computing: a systematic literature review. In: Zbakh M,
Essaaidi M, Manneback P, Rong C., eds. Cloud Computing and Big Data: Technologies, Applications and Security, , . 49 of Lecture Notes in
Networks and Systems. Springer, 2019:213–228
27. Qoudhadh N, Zbakh M. Algorithms scheduling applied to microservices architectures: a survey study. In: 2023:1–12
28. Pandit R, Dwivedi M. Resources load sharing using RR, FCFS, SJF, MSJF, GP algorithms in cloud computing. Neuroquantology. 2022;20(11):7853–
7872.
29. Anand N, Saifulla M. An efficient IDS for slow rate HTTP/2.0 DoS attacks using one class classification. In: 2023:1–9
30. Nemalikanti A, Kaki S, Ambati R, Tharun Y, Bagadi K, Ramesh D. Enhancing intrusion detection: protocol-based security using a hybrid RIDGE
classifier on InSDN, UNSW-NB15, BoT-IoT, and ToN-IoT datasets. Cluster Comput. 2025;28:663–680. doi: 10.1007/s10586-025-05404-y

16
QOUDHADH ET AL.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
Professor Mostapha Zbakh is a Full Professor at ENSIAS, Mohammed V University in Rabat. He has
published more than 66 articles in international journals and conference proceedings, accumulating over
760 citations (Google Scholar, 2025), with an h-index of 13 and an i10-index of 16. His research expertise
lies in distributed and parallel systems, high-performance computing (HPC), grid and cloud computing,
and intelligent data-center management. An active member of multiple research groups, he also organizes
the international CloudTech Conference, which focuses on cloud, IoT, and software-defined networking
(SDN) technologies.
Professor Claude Tadonki is a computer science researcher at Mines ParisTech – Centre de Recherche
en Informatique in Paris. He has published extensively in international journals and conferences, with
over 1,020 citations, an h-index of 17 and an i10-index of 25 (Google Scholar, 2025). His research
interests include high-performance computing, cloud and distributed systems, optimization, algorithms,
and operational research.
Professor Yassir Samadi is a Full Professor at the Faculty of Science of Tetouan. He has authored 17
publications. Which have accumulated over 5598 reads and more than 230 citations (ResearchGate,
2025). His research focuses on intelligent resource management in cloud platforms, benchmarking of
big-data frameworks, and task-scheduling algorithms for heterogeneous computing infrastructures.
Nadia Qoudhadh is a Ph.D. candidate at the National School of Computer Science and Systems Analysis
(ENSIAS), Mohammed V University in Rabat, Morocco. Her research focuses on cloud computing,
software-defined networking (SDN), and cybersecurity. Her work centers on dynamic multi-objective
scheduling in cloud-SDN environments, integrating bandwidth- and latency-aware resource allocation
with QoS-driven orchestration.
